feat: graceful shutdown and systemd socket activation in adapter-node (#11653)
sveltejs/kit: documentation/docs/25-build-and-deploy/40-adapter-node.md

The maximum request body size to accept in bytes including while streaming. Defaults to 512kb. You can disable this option with a value of 0 and implement a custom check in [`handle`](hooks#server-hooks-handle) if you need something more advanced.

### `SHUTDOWN_TIMEOUT`

The number of seconds to wait before forcefully closing any remaining connections after receiving a `SIGTERM` or `SIGINT` signal. Defaults to `30`. Internally the adapter calls [`closeAllConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseallconnections). See [Graceful shutdown](#graceful-shutdown) for more details.

### `IDLE_TIMEOUT`

> When using systemd socket activation specifies the number of seconds after which the app is automatically put to sleep when receiving no requests. If not set, the app runs continously. See [Socket activation](#socket-activation) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using systemd socket activation, `IDLE_TIMEOUT` specifies the number of seconds after which the app is automatically put to sleep when receiving no requests. If not set, the app runs continuously. See [Socket activation](#socket-activation) for more details.
```

node build
```

## Socket Activation

> Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will verify that these variables are correct and then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.

Reviewer 2: Will these environment variables _always_ be called that? The way this is written, I believe the adapted code will expect them to be prefixed with `envPrefix` if you've passed that config to the adapter. Is that desirable? Will that work?

If there's no way to control what env var names the OS expose to the app, we should either add a note not to use `envPrefix` in that case, or we should add different handling for `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` and add a note to the docs about that. I'm not entirely comfortable with that second solution, though.

Author: Oh~! right. They should never prefixed. They will always be called `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. I guess just not using prefix in that case is probably the better solution.

Reviewer 2: Hey! Sorry, I'm just getting back to reviewing this now. As far as I can tell, since you're using the `env()` function, `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` will still be looked for in their prefixed versions.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see you added a note in the docs about this. I don't know how I feel about the resolution being 'just don't use envPrefix'. Hm.

Author: Is `ENV_PREFIX` available in `index.js`? Maybe we could do something like the followiing instead?
```js
if (ENV_PREFIX && process.env.LISTEN_PID !== undefined && env('LISTEN_PID') !== undefined) {
	throw new Error('...')
}
```

Author: Or actually, we could probably slightly modify `env.js`.

Author: Or actually, we could probably slightly modify `env.js`.
```js
const expected_unprefixed = new Set(['LISTEN_PID', 'LISTEN_FDS']);

export function env(name, fallback) {
	const prefix = expected_unprefixed.has(name) ? '' : ENV_PREFIX;
	const prefixed = prefix + name;
	return prefixed in process.env ? process.env[prefixed] : fallback;
}
```

Author: @Conduitry what do you think?

Author: Okay, as discussed on Discord I slightly modified `env.js` to ignore `envPrefix` for the systemd env vars. I added a note in the docs that `envPrefix` can be used even if socket activation is enabled.

node build
```

## Graceful shutdown

By default `adapter-node` gracefully shuts down the HTTP server when a `SIGTERM` or `SIGINT` signal is received. It will:

1. reject new requests ([`server.close`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#serverclosecallback))
2. wait for requests that have already been made but not received a response yet to finish and close connections once they become idle ([`server.closeIdleConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseidleconnections))

> 3. and finally, close any remaining connections that are still active after [`SHUTDOWN_TIMEOUT`](#shutdown_timeout) seconds. ([`server.closeAllConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseallconnections))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. and finally, close any remaining connections that are still active after [`SHUTDOWN_TIMEOUT`](#environment-variables-shutdown-timeout) seconds. ([`server.closeAllConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseallconnections))
```

> If you want to customize this behaviour you can use a [custom server](#custom-server).

## Socket activation

Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case, the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.

> > You can still use [`envPrefix`](#envprefix) with systemd socket activation. `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` are always passed to the app without a prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can still use [`envPrefix`](#options-envprefix) with systemd socket activation. `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` are always passed to the app without a prefix.
```

> > You can still use [`envPrefix`](#options-envprefix) with systemd socket activation. `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` are always passed to the app without a prefix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> You can still use [`envPrefix`](#options-envprefix) with systemd socket activation. `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` are always read without a prefix.
```

'passed to the app with/without a prefix' sounds like we're adding a prefix to something as it's being read in, whereas what we're actually doing here is (not) stripping a prefix.

> Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case, the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will verify that these variables are correct and then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.

Reviewer: Thanks for all this. Last comment: I'd probably remove the portion about verifying to simplify and avoid questions. We have lots of validation throughout the app and don't bother stating it unless there's something the user needs to know. If there's some way the user can control `LISTEN_FDS` to ensure the value is 1 that might be worth mentioning, but just saying it needs to be correct without saying what correct means is probably not that useful
```suggestion
Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case, the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.
```

To take advantage of socket activation follow these steps.

> 1. Run your app as a [systemd service](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.service.html). It can either run directly on the host system or inside a container (using Docker or a systemd portable service for example). If you additionally pass an [`IDLE_TIMEOUT`](#idle_timeout) environment variable to your app it will gracefully shutdown if there are no requests for `IDLE_TIMEOUT` seconds. systemd will automatically start your app again when new requests are coming in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run your app as a [systemd service](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.service.html). It can either run directly on the host system or inside a container (using Docker or a systemd portable service for example). If you additionally pass an [`IDLE_TIMEOUT`](#environment-variables-idle-timeout) environment variable to your app it will gracefully shutdown if there are no requests for `IDLE_TIMEOUT` seconds. systemd will automatically start your app again when new requests are coming in.
```

node build
```

> [Socket activation](#socket-activation) does not work when a prefix is specified because `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` are set by the OS and cannot be renamed.

## Graceful shutdown

> By default `adapter-node` gracefully shuts down the HTTP server when a `SIGTERM` or `SIGINT` signal is received. It does this by calling [`server.close`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#serverclosecallback), [`server.closeIdleConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseidleconnections) and [`server.closeAllConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseallconnections) under the hood. This will
> 
> 1. wait for requests that have already been made but not received a response yet to finish
> 2. reject new requests
> 3. close connections once they become idle
> 4. and finally, close any remaining connections that are still active after [`SHUTDOWN_TIMEOUT`](#shutdown_timeout) seconds.

Reviewer: Without looking at the code, I'd kind of expect the order of 1. and 2. here to be reversed, so not sure if I'm wrong about that?

What do you think about including the links with the relevant bullet points:
```suggestion
By default `adapter-node` gracefully shuts down the HTTP server when a `SIGTERM` or `SIGINT` signal is received. It will:

1. reject new requests ([`server.close`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#serverclosecallback))
2. wait for requests that have already been made but not received a response yet to finish and close connections once they become idle ([`server.closeIdleConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseidleconnections))
3. and finally, close any remaining connections that are still active after [`SHUTDOWN_TIMEOUT`](#shutdown_timeout) seconds. ([`server.closeAllConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseallconnections))
```

Author: Yeah, this makes sense.

node build
```

> [Socket activation](#socket-activation) does not work when a prefix is specified because `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS` are set by the OS and cannot be renamed.

## Graceful shutdown

By default `adapter-node` gracefully shuts down the the internal `node:http` server when a `SIGTERM` or `SIGINT` signal is received. It does this by calling [`server.close`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#serverclosecallback), [`server.closeIdleConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseidleconnections) and [`server.closeAllConnections`](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#servercloseallconnections) under the hood. This will

1. wait for requests that have already been made but not received a response yet to finish
2. reject new requests
3. close connections once they become idle
4. and finally, close any remaining connections that are still active after [`SHUTDOWN_TIMEOUT`](#shutdown_timeout) seconds.

> If you want to customize this behaviour you can use a [custom server](#custom-server).

## Socket activation

> Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will verify that these variables are correct and then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case, the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will verify that these variables are correct and then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.
```

> Most Linux operating systems today use a modern process manager called systemd to start the server and run and manage services. You can configure your server to allocate a socket and start and scale your app on demand. This is called [socket activation](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/socket-activated-containers.html). In this case the OS will pass two environment variables to your app — `LISTEN_PID` and `LISTEN_FDS`. The adapter will verify that these variables are correct and then listen on file descriptor 3 which refers to a systemd socket unit that you will have to create.

Reviewer: "will verify that these variables are correct" - is a bit unclear to me. How can they be incorrect? What will happen if they're wrong? Will an error be thrown that the user needs to handle somehow. Or should it be something more like "will check if these variables refer to the current process" because they could be valid, but referring to another process?

Author: `LISTEN_PID` should always equal `process.pid`. systemd says you should verify that though I don't know in which cases this condition could ever be false. The second thing that's verified is that only one socket is passed to the app (`LISTEN_FDS === 1`). There isn't really a use case for multiple sockets in a single SvelteKit app. I mentioned it somewhere further down in the docs that only one socket is accepted. If either of those conditions is false then nothing happens. Socket activation wont be enabled and the app just starts as it normally would by listening on `PORT` instead.

Reviewer: I feel like it should probably throw an exception rather than silently continuing on in that case

Author: What would you suggest? Shoud I just do something like the following?
```js
const socket_activation = listen_pid === process.pid && listen_fds === 1;

if (listen_fds > 1) {
  throw new Error('only one socket is allowed for socket activation')
}
```

Reviewer: I was thinking something along the lines of:
```
if (listen_pid !== process.pid) {
  throw new Error(`received LISTEN_PID ${listen_pid} but current process id is ${process.pid}`)
}
if (listen_fds > 1) {
  throw new Error(`only one socket is allowed for socket activation, but LISTEN_FDS was set to ${LISTEN_FDS}`)
}
```

Author: Okay, I just added this.

To take advantage of socket activation follow these steps.

1. Run your app as a [systemd service](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.service.html). It can either run directly on the host system or inside a container (using Docker or a systemd portable service for example).

```ini
/// file: /etc/systemd/system/myapp.service
[Service]
Environment=NODE_ENV=production
ExecStart=/usr/bin/node /usr/bin/myapp/build
```

2. Create an accompanying [socket unit](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.socket.html). The adapter only accepts a single socket.

```ini
/// file: /etc/systemd/system/myapp.socket
[Socket]
ListenStream=3000

[Install]
WantedBy=sockets.target
```

3. Make sure systemd has recognised both units by running `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`. Then enable the socket on boot and start it immediately using `sudo systemctl enable --now myapp.socket`.

> The app will then automatically start once the first request is made to `localhost:3000`. Additionally, if you pass an `IDLE_TIMEOUT` environment variable to your app the adapter will terminate it after receiving no requests for `IDLE_TIMEOUT` seconds.

Reviewer: I think everything after "Additionally" could be moved up to the `IDLE_TIMEOUT` section above. It seems like an option that might not be too heavily used and this section is getting a bit long.

Author: I think `IDLE_TIMEOUT` will probably almost always be used when socket activation is enabled because one of the main benefits of socket activation is that you can automatically start/stop the app based on usage. But I'll try to clean/shorten it a bit.

Reviewer: One way to condense it a bit would be to demonstrate `IDLE_TIMEOUT` in bullet 1. By putting it here we end up duplicating the code block, which I think makes it longer.

Author: Okay, I just updated the docs.
